Nutrition indicators based on average consumption of  nutrients per capita per day   
Additional nutrition indicators based on per capita nutrients available 
for consumption have also been compiled. These indicators are 
calculated by first multiplying the edible amounts of the food 
commodities listed in the food module of the HCES survey and said to be 
available for consumption (not the actual intake) for each household, 
with their corresponding nutrient content derived from food composition 
tables (mostly for the raw form of the food before preparation).The 
nutrients that can be included are the essential amino acids, vitamins 
B1, B2, B6, B12, and C, folate, total vitamin A (expressed as both 
Retinal Equivalents and Retinol Activity Equivalents, zinc, calcium, 
and total iron. The next step is to estimate average consumption per 
capita per day. This is achieved by taking into account the number of 
members and visitors recorded as eating each meal in each household. 
Both per capita nutrient consumption and when expressed as nutrient 
density (i.e., per 1000 Kcals) can be estimated at the national level 
and when disaggregated into categories used to monitor or identify 
target populations for policy makers. The categories that can be 
included depends on the type of household socio-economic 
characteristics collected in the HCES in the country. In addition, heme 
iron, expressed as a percentage of total iron, can also be estimated. 

Examples of these nutrient-based indicators disaggregated by region, 
urban-rural areas, and quintile of income are given in Box 2.x.
Note that in the past, attempts to assess nutrient adequacy from HCES 
survey data estimated ratios of per capita availability of nutrients  
to the average weighted nutrient requirement at the population level. 
These ratios provided a gross indication of issues with 
meeting requirements of selected nutrients at the population 
level, but allowed no information on the prevalence of inadequate 
nutrient intakes in the population (Moltedo et al. 2018). Such 
information can only be generated from nutrient intakes measured at the 
individual level and compared with age- and sex-specific nutrient 
requirements using the methods described in Chapter 8b.

Consequently, recently efforts have been made to estimate the 
prevalence of nutrient inadequacy (PoNI) in the population based on 
HCES survey data. The new method extends the FAO probabilistic cut-
point method used earlier to estimate chronic dietary energy inadequacy 
to include nutrients other than dietary energy.  To achieve this 
objective, the data generated on average per capita nutrient 
consumption must first be pre-adjusted to yield the distribution of 
usual consumption by removing the excess variation due to within-person 
day-to-day variability and seasonal variability. Next, the distribution 
of usual consumption levels is then compared to a threshold to estimate 
PoNI. The threshold is based on the weighted average of the estimated 
average requirement (EAR)for the nutrient under study for each sex-age 
group in the population.  

Detailed instructions for estimating these indictors based on nutrient 
analysis using FCTs and the data from HCES and the new FAO 
probabilistic cut-point method, respectively,  are available at: 

UPGRADING ADePT-FSM FOR ANALZING FOOD SECURITY STATISTICS USING 
HOUDEHOLD CONSUMPTION AND EXPENDITURE SURVEY DATA
And

Moltedo, A., Álvarez-Sánchez, C., Troubat, N. & Cafiero, C. 2022. 
Estimating the prevalence of nutrient inadequacy from household 
consumption and expenditure surveys. FAO Statistics Working Paper 
Series, No. 22/30. Rome, FAO. https://doi.org/10.4060/cc2780ede. 


Special attention must also be given to the choice of the food 
composition tables used for the nutrient analysis. For discussion of 
some of the limitations of the nutrient values in food composition 
tables, consult Section 1.2 in the above ADePT-FSM Version 3 Software. 
Note that this version of the ADePT software also 
permits an assessment of the micronutrient content in foods consumed 
away from home.

 Box 2.x Selected indicators* based on average nutrient consumption per capita per day   

*	Household share of animal protein in total protein.
o	based on acquisition and/or consumption and an example of a 
nutrient-based indicator that can be used as a proxy 
measure of dietary quality at the population level. 
o	Calculated as: total protein from animal sources (in grams) 
x 100/ Total protein in grams)from all foods 
o	Higher percentage of animal source protein likely to be 
associated with a higher absolute consumption of animal 
source foods, which provide a variety of micronutrients 
that are either less frequent or less bioavailable in 
plant-based food sources. Food commodities considered as 
animal source foods include meat, fish, eggs, milk, and 
cheese. See ADePT-FSM SOFTWARE for more details.

*	Zinc consumption (mg/capita/day) at national, income quintile, and 
urban-rural levels
o	Note that zinc consumption is not adjusted for bioavailability in 
view of the paucity of phytate data currently available in FCTs
*	Zinc density (mg/1000Kcal) at national, income quintile, and urban-
rural levels
o	Density computed as mean of HHs nutrient densities 
*	Folate consumption expressed as Dietary Folate Equivalents (DFEs) 
(ug/capita/day) at national, income quintile, and urban-rural levels
*	DFE density (ug/1000Kcal) at national, income quintile, and urban-rural 
levels
*	Vitamin A consumption expressed as Retinol Eqivalents or Retinol 
Activity Equivalents (ug Re or RAE/capita/day) at national, income 
quintile, and urban-rural levels
*	RAE density (ug/1000Kcal) at national, income quintile, and urban-rural 
levels
*	Total iron (mg/capita/day at national, income quintile, and urban-rural 
levels
*	Heme iron (as percent of total iron) at national, income quintile, and 
urban-rural levels
o	Heme iron content estimated from raw and cooked meat from 
literature sources
*	Prevalence of Nutrient Inadequacy (PoNI) for vitamins B1,B2,B6, 
B12, vitamin A, vitamin C, Ca, Zn
o	Estimates via probabilistic EAR cut-point method.
o	These estimates compared with individual level Bangladeshi 
data and EAR cut-point methods appear promising.  

For additional food security and nutrition indicators, see 
       https://www.fao.org/3/cb2465en/cb2465en/pdf
 
Moltedo et al. (2022) compared the prevalence of 
inadequacy estimated with pre-treated data from the Bangladesh 
Integrated Household Survey versus estimates obtained from individual-
level Bangladesh data.   The analysis was performed for eight 
micronutrients (vitamins A, B1, B2, B6, B12 and C, and calcium and 
zinc). They concluded that the use of HCES data to estimate PoNI based 
on their new method appears promising, especially when no large-scale 
dietary surveys at the individual level exist. Further studies are 
needed, however, using data sets from other countries to explore 
further the usefulness of this new approach. 





